Add an otelcol.processor.resourcedetection component (#5764)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/reference/components/otelcol.processor.resourcedetection.md

[kubernetes_node-resource_attributes]: #kubernetes_node--resource_attributes

### output

{{< docs/shared lookup="flow/reference/components/output-block.md" source="agent" version="<AGENT VERSION>" >}}

### ec2

The `ec2` block uses [AWS SDK for Go](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/api/aws/ec2metadata/) to read 
resource information from the [EC2 instance metadata API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-metadata.html).

The following attributes are supported:

Name   | Type           | Description                          | Default     | Required
------ |----------------|--------------------------------------|-------------| --------
`tags` | `list(string)` |                                      | `[]`        | no

### ec2 > resource_attributes

The following attributes are supported:

Name   | Type           | Description                          | Default     | Required
------ |----------------|--------------------------------------|-------------| --------
`name` | `string` |                                      | `[]`        | no

### ecs

### ecs > resource_attributes

### eks

### eks > resource_attributes

### elasticbeanstalk

> ### elasticbeanstalk > resource_attributes

Reviewer: @ptodev I know there's been no visible movement on PR #5381 but.... it's a good proposal, and I've been wanting to get started on implementing it across all Ref topics... just haven't got to it yet.

Also.. guidelines for docs layouts should be that.. guidelines. If following the guideline results in a mess, we should be flexible and adjust the approach. If there's a better way (even when that means adjusting existing docs) that makes things more clear and understandable, then I'd say go for it. In this case there's already a PR open suggesting the same change so this PR is not a change that exists in isolation.

> ### elasticbeanstalk > resource_attributes

Author: I updated the PR to hide the `... > resource_attributes` headings in the ToC:
https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/5764#discussion_r1447975010

different labels.

## Usage

```river
otelcol.processor.resourcedetection "LABEL" {
  output {
    logs    = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` supports the following arguments:

Name        | Type           | Description                                                                            | Default | Required
----------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |-------- | --------
`detectors` | `list(string)` | An ordered list of named detectors which should be ran to detect resource information. |         | yes
`override`  | `bool`         | Configures whether existing resource attributes should be overriden or preserved.      | `true`  | no
`timeout`   | `duration`     | Timeout by which all specified detectors must complete.                                | `"5s"`  | no

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection`:

Hierarchy                              | Block                                                       | Description                                       | Required

> -------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | --------

Author: I'd like to rename this section to "Configuration" and remove the table with blocks. In its place I could put a table with "root level" attributes and a table with "root level" blocks. This was already described in #5390

in a format that conforms to the [OpenTelemetry resource semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/), and appends or
overrides the resource values in the telemetry data with this information.

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` is a wrapper over the upstream
OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib `resourcedetection` processor. If necessary, 
bug reports or feature requests will be redirected to the upstream repository.
{{% /admonition %}}

You can specify multiple `otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` components by giving them
different labels.

## Usage

```river
otelcol.processor.resourcedetection "LABEL" {
  output {
    logs    = [...]
    metrics = [...]
    traces  = [...]
  }
}
```

## Arguments

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` supports the following arguments:

Name        | Type           | Description                                                                            | Default   | Required
----------- | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |---------- | --------

> `detectors` | `list(string)` | An ordered list of named detectors which should be ran to detect resource information. | `["env"]` | no

Author: The detectors are ran by `otelcol.processor.resourcedetection`. For example, `ecs` and `consul` are detectors. I think `should be ran` is ok because it indicates that if a detector is no listed in `detectors`, it will not be ran at all.

> `detectors` | `list(string)` | An ordered list of named detectors which should be ran to detect resource information. | `["env"]` | no

Reviewer: "ran" is past tense, so it's probably the wrong word here. "should" implies it's optional.. you should do it.. but you don't have to.

`An ordered list of named detectors used to detect resource information.`  This leaves it open to whichever process "owns" and runs the detectors.

> `detectors` | `list(string)` | An ordered list of named detectors which should be ran to detect resource information. | `["env"]` | no

Author: Ok, thank you, I'll change it to that!

`override`  | `bool`         | Configures whether existing resource attributes should be overridden or preserved.     | `true`    | no
`timeout`   | `duration`     | Timeout by which all specified detectors must complete.                                | `"5s"`    | no

`detectors` could contain the following values:
* `env`
* `ec2`
* `ecs`
* `eks`
* `elasticbeanstalk`
* `lambda`
* `azure`
* `aks`
* `consul`
* `docker`
* `gcp`
* `heroku`
* `system`
* `openshift`
* `kubernetes_node`

Note that `env` is the only detector which is not configured through a River block.
The `env` detector reads resource information from the `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable. 
This is expected to be in the format `<key1>=<value1>,<key2>=<value2>,...`, 
the details of which are currently pending confirmation in the OpenTelemetry specification.

If a detector other than `env` is needed, it can be customized by using the relevant River block for it.
For example, the `ec2` detector can be customized using the [ec2][] block.

> If the [ec2][] block is omitted, the defaults specified in the [ec2][] block documentation will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you omit the [ec2][] block, the defaults specified in the [ec2][] block documentation are used.
```

If multiple detectors are inserting the same attribute name, the first detector to insert wins. 

> For example if you had `detectors = ["eks", "ec2"]` then `cloud.platform` will be `aws_eks` instead of `ec2`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you had `detectors = ["eks", "ec2"]` then `cloud.platform` will be `aws_eks` instead of `ec2`. 
```

> For AWS, the below ordering is recommended:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following order is recommended for AWS:
```

`tags`      | `list(string)` | A list of regular expressions to match against tag keys of an EC2 instance. | `[]`        | no

If you are using a proxy server on your EC2 instance, it's important that you exempt requests for instance metadata as described in the [AWS cli user guide][]. 
Failing to do so can result in proxied or missing instance data.

If the instance is part of AWS ParallelCluster and the detector is failing to connect to the metadata server, 
check the iptable and make sure the chain `PARALLELCLUSTER_IMDS` contains a rule that allows the {{< param "PRODUCT_ROOT_NAME" >}} user to access `169.254.169.254/32`.

[AWS SDK for Go]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/api/aws/ec2metadata/
[EC2 instance metadata API]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-metadata.html
[AWS cli user guide]: https://github.com/awsdocs/aws-cli-user-guide/blob/a2393582590b64bd2a1d9978af15b350e1f9eb8e/doc_source/cli-configure-proxy.md#using-a-proxy-on-amazon-ec2-instances

`tags` can be used to gather tags for the EC2 instance which {{< param "PRODUCT_ROOT_NAME" >}} is running on. 

> Note that in order to fetch EC2 tags, the IAM role assigned to the EC2 instance must have a policy that includes the `ec2:DescribeTags` permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fetch EC2 tags, the IAM role assigned to the EC2 instance must have a policy that includes the `ec2:DescribeTags` permission.
```

We should avoid using "note that". If it is actually a note, then we should use the note admonition shortcode.

The text "in order to" can almost always be simplified to "to".

[gcp.cloud_run.job.task_index][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `gcp.cloud_run.job.task_index` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no
[gcp.gce.instance.hostname][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `gcp.gce.instance.hostname` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `false` by default.        | no
[gcp.gce.instance.name][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `gcp.gce.instance.name` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `false` by default.        | no
[host.id][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `host.id` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no
[host.name][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `host.name` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no
[host.type][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `host.type` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no
[k8s.cluster.name][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `k8s.cluster.name` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no

> #### Google Compute Engine (GCE) Metadata

Reviewer: Are all these headings supposed to be initial caps? Google Compute Engine should be (it defines the GCE acronym) but is `Metadata` also supposed to be initial caps?

Author: There is no reason for `Metadata` that I can think of, so I will lower it.

* `cloud.provider`: `"gcp"`
* `cloud.platform`: `"gcp_compute_engine"`
* `cloud.account.id`: project id
* `cloud.region`: e.g. `"us-central1"`
* `cloud.availability_zone`: e.g. `"us-central1-c"`
* `host.id`: instance id
* `host.name`: instance name
* `host.type`: machine type
* (optional) `gcp.gce.instance.hostname`
* (optional) `gcp.gce.instance.name`

#### Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) Metadata

* `cloud.provider`: `"gcp"`
* `cloud.platform`: `"gcp_kubernetes_engine"`
* `cloud.account.id`: project id
* `cloud.region`: only for regional GKE clusters; e.g. `"us-central1"`
* `cloud.availability_zone`: only for zonal GKE clusters; e.g. `"us-central1-c"`
* `k8s.cluster.name`
* `host.id`: instance id
* `host.name`: instance name; only when workload identity is disabled

> One known issue is when GKE workload identity is enabled, the GCE metadata endpoints won't be available, 
> thus the GKE resource detector won't be able to determine `host.name`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One known issue happens when GKE workload identity is enabled. The GCE metadata endpoints won't be available, 
and the GKE resource detector won't be able to determine `host.name`. 
```

> In that case, users are encouraged to set `host.name` from either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this happens, you can set `host.name` from one of the following resources:
```

> - `node.name` through the downward API with the `env` detector.
> - Obtaining the Kubernetes node name from the Kubernetes API (with `k8s.io/client-go`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get the `node.name` through the downward API with the `env` detector.
- Get the Kubernetes node name from the Kubernetes API (with `k8s.io/client-go`).
```

What is a downward API.

Author: It is a way for a pod to get more information about the environment it is running in:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/downward-api/

I'll change "downward API" to be a link to the k8s docs.

[os.type][res-attr-cfg]        | Toggles the `os.type` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.        | no

### openshift

The `openshift` block queries the OpenShift and Kubernetes APIs to retrieve various resource attributes.

The `openshift` block supports the following attributes:

Attribute  | Type      | Description                                             | Default     | Required
---------- |---------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |-------------| --------
`address`  | `string`  | Address of the OpenShift API server.                    | _See below_ | no
`token`    | `string`  | Token used to identify against the OpenShift API server.| ""          | no

The "get", "watch", and "list" permissions are required:

```yaml
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
rules:
- apiGroups: ["config.openshift.io"]
  resources: ["infrastructures", "infrastructures/status"]
  verbs: ["get", "watch", "list"]
```

By default, the API address is determined from the environment variables `KUBERNETES_SERVICE_HOST`, 
`KUBERNETES_SERVICE_PORT` and the service token is read from `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token`. 

> If TLS is not explicit disabled and no `ca_file` is configured, `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/ca.crt` is used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If TLS is not explicitly disabled and no `ca_file` is configured, `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/ca.crt` is used. 
```

> The determination of the API address, `ca_file` and the service token is skipped if they are set in the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The determination of the API address, `ca_file`, and the service token is skipped if they are set in the configuration.
```

[k8s.cluster.name][res-attr-cfg]  | Toggles the `k8s.cluster.name` resource attribute. <br> Sets `enabled` to `true` by default.  | no

### kubernetes_node

The `kubernetes_node` block queries the Kubernetes API server to retrieve various node resource attributes.

The `kubernetes_node` block supports the following attributes:

Attribute           | Type     | Description                                                               | Default           | Required
------------------- |--------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |------------------ | --------
`auth_type`         | `string` | Configures how to authenticate to the K8s API server.                     | `"none"`          | no
`context`           | `string` | Override the current context when `auth_type` is set to `"kubeConfig"`.   | `""`              | no
`node_from_env_var` | `string` | The name of an environment variable from which to retrieve the node name. | `"K8S_NODE_NAME"` | no

The "get" and "list" permissions are required:

```yaml
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: grafana-agent
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["nodes"]
    verbs: ["get", "list"]
```

> `auth_type` can be set either of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`auth_type` can be set to one of the following:
```

... or:

> Sets `enabled` to `false` by default.

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

Name | Type | Description
---- | ---- | -----------
`input` | `otelcol.Consumer` | A value that other components can use to send telemetry data to.

`input` accepts `otelcol.Consumer` OTLP-formatted data for any telemetry signal of these types:
* logs
* metrics
* traces

## Component health

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
configuration.

## Debug information

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` does not expose any component-specific debug
information.

## Examples

### env detector

If you set up a `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable with value of `TestKey=TestValue`,
then all logs, metrics, and traces will have a resource attribute with a key `TestKey` and value of `TestValue`.

```river
otelcol.processor.resourcedetection "default" {
  detectors = ["env"]

  output {
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

### env and ec2

> There is no need to put in a `ec2 {}` River block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no need to put in an `ec2 {}` River block.
```

  detectors = ["ec2"]
  ec2 {
    tags = ["^tag1$", "^tag2$", "^label.*$"]
    resource_attributes {
      cloud.account.id  { enabled = true }
      cloud.availability_zone  { enabled = true }
      cloud.platform  { enabled = true }
      cloud.provider  { enabled = true }
      cloud.region  { enabled = true }
      host.id  { enabled = true }
      host.image.id  { enabled = false }
      host.name  { enabled = false }
      host.type  { enabled = false }
    }
  }

  output {
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

### kubernetes_node

This example uses the default `node_from_env_var` option of `K8S_NODE_NAME`.

There is no need to put in a `kubernetes_node {}` River block.
The `kubernetes_node` defaults will be applied automatically, as specified in [kubernetes_node][].

```river
otelcol.processor.resourcedetection "default" {
  detectors = ["kubernetes_node"]

  output {
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

> You need to also add this to your workload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to add this to your workload:
```

```yaml
        env:
          - name: K8S_NODE_NAME
            valueFrom:
              fieldRef:
                fieldPath: spec.nodeName
```

### kubernetes_node with a custom environment variable

This example uses a custom `node_from_env_var` set to `my_custom_var`.

```river
otelcol.processor.resourcedetection "default" {
  detectors = ["kubernetes_node"]
  kubernetes_node {
    node_from_env_var = "my_custom_var"
  }

  output {
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}
```

> You need to also add this to your workload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to add this to your workload:
```

```yaml
        env:
          - name: my_custom_var
            valueFrom:
              fieldRef:
                fieldPath: spec.nodeName
```
<!-- START GENERATED COMPATIBLE COMPONENTS -->

## Compatible components

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` can accept arguments from the following components:

- Components that export [OpenTelemetry `otelcol.Consumer`]({{< relref "../compatibility/#opentelemetry-otelcolconsumer-exporters" >}})

`otelcol.processor.resourcedetection` has exports that can be consumed by the following components:

- Components that consume [OpenTelemetry `otelcol.Consumer`]({{< relref "../compatibility/#opentelemetry-otelcolconsumer-consumers" >}})

{{% admonition type="note" %}}

> Connecting some components may not be sensible or components may require further configuration to make the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connecting some components may not be sensible, or components may require further configuration to make the 
```

`detectors` could contain the following values:
* `env`
* `ec2`
* `ecs`
* `eks`
* `elasticbeanstalk`
* `lambda`
* `azure`
* `aks`
* `consul`
* `docker`
* `gcp`
* `heroku`
* `system`
* `openshift`
* `kubernetes_node`

Note that `env` is the only detector which is not configured through a River block.
The `env` detector reads resource information from the `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable. 
This is expected to be in the format `<key1>=<value1>,<key2>=<value2>,...`, 
the details of which are currently pending confirmation in the OpenTelemetry specification.

If a detector other than `env` is needed, it can be customized by using the relevant River block for it.
For example, the `ec2` detector can be customized using the [ec2][] block.
If the [ec2][] block is omitted, the defaults specified in the [ec2][] block documentation will be used.

If multiple detectors are inserting the same attribute name, the first detector to insert wins. 
For example if you had `detectors = ["eks", "ec2"]` then `cloud.platform` will be `aws_eks` instead of `ec2`. 

For AWS, the below ordering is recommended:
  1. [lambda][]
  1. [elasticbeanstalk][]
  1. [eks][]
  1. [ecs][]
  1. [ec2][]

> <!-- TODO: Why do the otel docs also list a GCP ordering? There is only one GCP detector. -->

Author: I need to check this:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.87.0/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor/README.md#gcp

Reviewer 2: the resourcedetection readme needs a fix probably. I found that gce and gke were deprecated to use only one gcp detector https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/10347, ordering for gcp is not needed anymore if I understood correctly

check the iptable and make sure the chain `PARALLELCLUSTER_IMDS` contains a rule that allows the {{< param "PRODUCT_ROOT_NAME" >}} user to access `169.254.169.254/32`.

[AWS SDK for Go]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/api/aws/ec2metadata/
[EC2 instance metadata API]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-metadata.html
[AWS cli user guide]: https://github.com/awsdocs/aws-cli-user-guide/blob/a2393582590b64bd2a1d9978af15b350e1f9eb8e/doc_source/cli-configure-proxy.md#using-a-proxy-on-amazon-ec2-instances

`tags` can be used to gather tags for the EC2 instance which {{< param "PRODUCT_ROOT_NAME" >}} is running on. 
Note that in order to fetch EC2 tags, the IAM role assigned to the EC2 instance must have a policy that includes the `ec2:DescribeTags` permission.

The `ec2` block supports the following blocks:

Block                                          | Description                                       | Required
---------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | --------
[resource_attributes](#ec2--resource_attributes) | Configures which resource attributes to add.      | no

> ##### ec2 > resource_attributes

Author: These `... > resource_attributes` headings have a small weight of `####` so that they don't appear in the ToC. This makes the ToC much cleaner.

`datacenter` | `string`       | Datacenter to use. If not provided, the default agent datacenter is used. | `""`        | no
`token`      | `secret`       | A per-request ACL token which overrides the Consul agent's default (empty) token. | `""`        | no
`namespace`  | `string`       | The name of the namespace to send along for the request. | `""`        | no
`meta`       | `list(string)` | Allowlist of [Consul Metadata][] keys to use as resource attributes. | `[]`        | no

`token` is only required if [Consul's ACL System][] is enabled.

[Consul Metadata]: https://www.consul.io/docs/agent/options#node_meta
[Consul's ACL System]: https://www.consul.io/docs/security/acl/acl-system

The `consul` block supports the following blocks:

Block                                          | Description                                       | Required
---------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | --------
[resource_attributes](#consul--resource_attributes) | Configures which resource attributes to add.      | no

#### consul > resource_attributes

The `resource_attributes` block supports the following blocks:

> <!-- TODO: Why are all these azure resource attributes here? -->

Author: I need to check this too:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/v0.87.0/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor/internal/consul/internal/metadata/generated_config.go#L28-L37

Author: I raised a PR to fix this upstream:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/30727
